the Palestinian militant group Hamas has
released the first group of hostages
it's been holding since its terrorist
attacks on Israel on October 7th the
International Red Cross confirmed Hamas
released 24 people including 13 Israeli
women and children in return Israel has
released 39 Palestinians it was holding
in
jails on the road to Freedom the first
group of Israeli hostages released by
Hamas militants and entered Egypt via
the Rafa border crossing from
Gaza after weeks of Anguish they are now
in safe
hands their first stop a medical
facility in
Rafa the Convoy then crossed into Israel
to undergo further medical checks and
finally reunite with loved
ones
among those freed are mothers and their
children as well as elderly women
Israel's leader says he's committed to
bringing home all
abductees we have now completed the
return of the first of our hostages
children their mothers and other women
each and every one of them is a whole
world but I stress to you for families
and to you citizens of Israel
we are committed to the return of all of
our hostages this is one of the goals of
a war and we are committed to achieving
all of the goals of war in the occupied
West Bank a group of 39 Palestinian
inmates were freed as part of the
temporary truce those released include
only women and
miners in ramala large crowds gathered
to welcome them home more Palestinian
prisoners and Israeli hostages are set
to be released in the coming
days DW correspondent Tanya Kramer is in
Jerusalem and joins us now hello Tanya
it's been an emotional 24 hours hasn't
it how is the atmosphere inside
Israel well I think it has been a day uh
on Friday of mixed feelings because on
the one hand there was a lot of joy and
relief obviously about the that
everything went well that those 13 uh
Israeli hostages were released alongside
11 hostages uh uh that were uh Tha
Nationals and uh Philippine citizen that
were also captured on o October 7 they
were also brought uh home so uh but
again now the focus is already on uh
today because uh there's hope that the
same scenario will play out again uh
Hamas has uh submitted a list uh
according to Israeli media here of
another 13 names uh of hostages that
will be uh released today probably in
the same kind of uh scenario so all eyes
are on that already uh at the same time
of course there are those families who
might not have their relatives on that
list uh we know that in the next coming
days uh for four days there will be uh
all in all 50 hostages that will be
released under this agreement but there
many more of course of the two over 230
hostages that are being held by Hamas
and other militant factions in Gaza that
might uh might stay behind so there's a
lot of concern what will happen with
them especially that Israel has said you
know the war will continue after this uh
truce now in exchange 39 Palestinians
have been released from a prison in the
West Bank what can you tell us about
them
yes late last night also those uh 39 uh
Palestinians uh that were jailed in
Israeli prisons were released we know it
was uh there were 24 women and 15
teenagers uh so under the age of uh 18
also their families had prepared you
know that they are uh coming home uh
there was also a lot of uh you know
celebration there we also understand
there were police raids at least in uh
in Jerusalem with some of the families
there were some restrictions placed on
the daytin when they come home that
there shouldn't be a big uh celebrations
but again there as well you know the
same scenario today we're expecting more
uh uh prisoners being uh released um
under the agreement up to 150 as far as
we and we understand should be released
so uh we're waiting to see uh whether
this will happen today as well overall
uh Tanya how would you describe the mood
on the ground it's a bit Bittersweet
isn't
it yeah it is I mean uh on the one hand
of course you know we are waiting to see
whether this very fragile and shaky
choose so far it's holding uh will be
holding now whether you know all these
uh the the the hostages as planned will
be released today and tomorrow every day
hearing a dozen hostages should be
released in exchange for more uh
Palestinian prisoners but of course you
have to look also into Gaza um what is
happening there you understand more
humanitarian Aid is going into Gaza
right now and More Trucks uh of
humanitarian Aid entered uh on Friday
through the Egyptian crossing the rafar
crossing but again for people their
residents in Gaza it's also very um you
know uncertain moment because they know
for now the CHS were set for 4 days it
might be extended if more hostages are
released but then you know the the the
war might resume so it's a very
uncertain and um situation for people
there as well right DW correspondent
Tanya Kar in Jerusalem many
thanks now US President Joe Biden has
welcomed the release of the first group
of hostages Biden said he hoped more
would be released in the coming days he
also said he hoped the C 4 days ceased
fire would be extended we also look to
the Future as we look to the future we
have to end this cycle of violence in
the Middle East we need to renew our
resolve to pursue this two-state
solution where Israelis and Palestinians
can one day live side by side in a
two-state solution with equal measure of
freedom and dignity two states for two
peoples and it's more important now than
ever hamash unleash this terrorist
attack because they fear nothing more
than is Isis and Palestinians living
side by side in
peace Mike Martin is a former British
army officer and Senior fellow in the
department of War studies at Kings
College London hello Mike thanks for
joining us the hostage release and
prisoner swap seems to have gone
smoothly on day one the truth seems to
be holding has it been a successful deal
so
far I I think it has been a very
successful deal um I I think the truth
is with these sorts of operations is
that each time it iterates so the uh
Hamas release people and then the
Israelis release people it builds up a
very low level of operational trust that
these sorts of deals can happen and can
work um and so that obviously will build
on some of the some of the successes
that we've seen but at the same time
it's very easy to have an accident or
perhaps a spoiler to to break these
deals apart and so everything needs to
be watched very carefully planned very
carefully lots of communication between
the sides so it's very early but so far
so good I mean a bit on what you just
said will any of the sites want to
jeopardize the situation right
now no I don't think they will but the
sides are not homogeneous well the
Israeli side is much more homogeneous
than than than Hamas but within Hamas it
uh may prove to be difficult to control
absolutely everybody within Hamas and
then there are other actors in the Gaza
Strip like the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
which is another militant movement and
they haven't been included in this deal
so they may want to Scupper that deal
and of course we've got a situation
where thousands of people have been
killed and so many of their relatives
will be looking to perhaps carry out
something that that that is not part of
this deal so you know it that this is
why these sorts of things are so so
difficult not because of the people who
made the deal but because of all the
other people who live and are involved
in the area right now as the ceasefire
continues what do you think the Israeli
forces in Gaza will be doing right now
and what will Hamas be
doing so both sides will use this
operational paes as a way of restocking
so getting their Logistics working
moving ammunition water food around in
case hostilities resume and also both
sides particularly the Israelis will be
using uh this chance whilst their
opponents are restocking to conduct
intelligence so they will be trying to
look at where supply routes are where
dispositions of enemy forces are and
what capabilities they have so whil
there's no fighting going on it's a
great chance to spy on each other
effectively is there any chance you
think I mean the US uh President Biden
hopes that the truce will go beyond 4
days is there any chance of that
happening you
think my reading of that is you know in
addition to what I just said about how
these types of deals tend to build lower
levels of trust that then can perhaps be
built on but I think there's another
thing I think that Israel May well be
realizing that it actually cannot
achieve what it set out to achieve
conducting a massive ground operation
like it has been conducting and so this
truce actually offers a chance to move
into a ceasefire while Saving Face to
come back from that original aim of
eliminating Hamas to a massive ground
operation which is very difficult of
course I think what we need to see
excuse me is a road to bringing all of
the hostages out and if that happens day
by day more hostages come out if that
happens then I think we're in a position
where perhaps a longer term ceasefire
could take hold okay Mike Martin in
London thank
you thank
you as we heard earlier 39 Palestinians
have been released most of those are
women with some teenage boys one of the
women released is Mara bakia she spent 8
years in jail for a knife attack on a
Israeli border policeman when she was 16
years old she's now been returned to
East
Jerusalem marav Air's mother holds her
tight unable to fight the
tears it's been eight years since her
daughter was jailed in an Israeli
[Laughter]
prison Mara is now home but the feeling
is bitter
sweet I'm happy to be out but at the
same time it is very upsetting that the
price paid for our release is the blood
of the people of
Gaza Mara was only 16 when she was
jailed on knife and assault charges her
mother has been waiting ever since for
this
day she was shot 14 times she needed me
it was very painful not having her here
similar joy to that of the bakir family
was felt in the occupied West Bank as
dozens of released prisoners were
reunited with their
families Palestinian prisoners were
paraded in front of euphoric
supporters we're beyond words God
willing all the prisoners will be
released before their release clouds of
white smoke filled the air as Israeli
authorities fired tear gas to disperse
the
crowds according to the Palestinian red
crescent several people were
wounded a total of 150 Palestinian
prisoners are expected to be freed in
line with the deal maybe more if the
truce is
extended journalist ham baloa was in
Gaza until recently he joins us now from
the Jordanian capital man hello ham tell
us more about the reaction in Gaza to
the release of the Palestinian
prisoners in Gaza it's a different
feeling different reaction uh people are
happy for those who were released in the
West Bank but they are not happy for
what they have uh have had experienced
uh during the Past Times um when the
fighting was going on before the bows um
and they are not happy for or what they
had or have seen um during the the first
day of the those more devastating uh
areas there many of them they um um made
sure that their houses are grounded and
and some people are busy of um um taking
out some bues they're still under the
rle um in the same time they they some
of the people they were supporting this
um um this deal and the release of the
exchange of of prisoners um but in the
same time some some of them they were
angry and think this is not worth
it there are reports that three people
in the West Bank were shot and wounded
in clashes with Israeli Security Forces
does the truth not apply to the West
Bank yes um even in in Gaza there were
some reports that the two were killed
while they were trying to u to go from
South to the north um um the agreement
is clear is for Gaza um um the the the
the the the ceasefire and the bows will
will be implemented only in Gaza Strip
and to help the hostilities in Gaza
Strip nobody or no one mentioned the
West Bank or other places even in in
Lebanon it wasn't mentioned there that
Lebanon going to be included or other
places like like Yemen or whatever who
was um or whoever was was involved in
this fighting so we are talking about
Gaza and Gaza STP this agreement between
Hamas and Israel to Hal the the the
hostilities and to release or exchange
of U of prisoners between Gaza and
Israel
so as as you say the ceasefire is
supposed to still be in effect it's
supposed to be in effect for 4 days what
can we expect from today
onwards well um it's in two levels if we
are talking about like the ordinary
people they they are looking for more
peaceful days more quiet days so they
can um uh retreat they can they can um
have more relief um um they get more
more supplies um more more Aid come into
Gaza and they need more trucks to come
uh in the same time they the people all
all the people that I talk to and I seen
that they are looking for extension of
these days and they um in fact most of
the people they want a full ceasefire
that to stop all the war and to go back
to their
homes right journalist ham Bala in a man
thank
you thank
you